# Chapter 1: Introduction

There are many reasons why you would want to write a device driver:
- It is a nice entry point for wannabe kernel hackers (like myself).
- You may have a niche device that nobody cares about other than you.
- It will help you understand the OS you are running and the hardware.
- Or maybe you are a hardware vendor and you want to support Linux and BSD.

Device drivers are somewhat easy to write and will teach you many cool things about the OS you are targeting (in my case, hopefully, Linux and some BSD variants).

> Device drivers take on a special role in the Linux kernel. They are distinct "black boxes" that make a particular piece of hardware respond to a well-defined internal programming interface; they completely hide the details of how the device works. User activities are performed by means of a set of standardized calls that are independent of the specific driver; mapping those calls to device-specific operations that act on real hardware is then the role of the device driver. This programming interface is such that drivers can be built separately from the rest of the kernel and "plugged in" at runtime when needed. This modularity makes Linux drivers easy to write, to the point that there are now hundreds of them available.

## The Role of the Device Driver

The role of the device driver is to provide mechanisms that allow users (and apps) to use the capabilities of the device however they want by being as policy-free as possible.

> The distinction between mechanism and policy is one of the best ideas behind Unix design. Most programming problems can indeed be split into two parts: "what capabilities are to be provided" (the mechanism) and "how those capabilities can be used" (the policy). If the two issues are addressed by different parts of the program, or even by different programs altogether, the software package is much easier to develop and to adapt to particular needs.
>
> For example, Unix management of the graphic display is split between the X server, which knows the hardware and offers a unified interface to user programs, and the window and session managers, which implement a particular policy without knowing anything about the hardware. People can use the same window manager on different hardware, and different users can run different configurations on the same workstation.

The same separation also applies to device drivers. For example, you can use `/dev/zero` to completely erase a memory device with `dd`. Or you can make a random password generator using `/dev/random`:
```sh
cat /dev/random | tr -dc [:graph:] | head -c 100
```
Neither `/dev/zero` nor `/dev/random` forces you into certain policies. They just provide you with a mechanism that is outputting an infinite amount of zero or random chars. You decide the policies (why and how) to use.

The concern of the driver should be to make the device available, leaving concerns about how to use the device to apps. That being said, sometimes some policies must be provided by the driver.

Since being policy-free also helps with being simple, writing and maintaining policy-free drivers is relatively easy.

## Splitting the Kernel

The role of the kernel is making computing resources available to processes. Different processes may have different resource requests, such as memory or network connectivity from the kernel. Practically, the kernel is the executable that is in charge of such requests. We can split the role of the kernel into the following parts:
- Process management
- Memory management
- Dealing with filesystems (Well, everything is a file in Unix.)
- Device control (which is our current point of interest)
- Networking

## Modules

You can add and remove modules at runtime on most Unix-like operating systems.
> Each piece of code that can be added to the kernel at runtime is called a module. The Linux kernel offers support for quite a few different types (or classes) of modules, including, but not limited to, device drivers. Each module is made up of object code (not linked into a complete executable) that can be dynamically linked to the running kernel by the insmod program and can be unlinked by the rmmod program.

There are many classes of drivers, but here are the three main classes of devices and modules:
- Character devices
- Block devices
- Network interfaces

### Character Devices

Character devices are the most common type of devices. They are devices that can be accessed with a stream of bytes via a file system node. They usually implement open, close, read, and write sys calls. `/dev/console`, `/dev/tty` are examples of character devices.

### Block Devices

Block devices are devices that can host a filesystem. They can handle I/O operations that transfer one or more blocks of data. They also can be accessed via file nodes in the `/dev` directory.

In FreeBSD, block devices are deprecated, see: <https://docs.freebsd.org/en/books/arch-handbook/driverbasics/#driverbasics-block>.

### Network Interfaces

> Not being a stream-oriented device, a network interface isn't easily mapped to a node in the filesystem, as /dev/tty1 is. The Unix way to provide access to interfaces is still by assigning a unique name to them (such as eth0), but that name doesn't have a corresponding entry in the filesystem. Communication between the kernel and a network device driver is completely different from that used with char and block drivers. Instead of read and write, the kernel calls functions related to packet transmission.

## Security

Since we're dealing with some low-level kernel stuff, the security, reliability, and safety of the code are obviously more important than ever. Therefore, considering the fact that I'm just a script kiddie who blindly follows a 20-year-old book, I strongly advise you to do your own research on security matters.

That being said, the 20-year-old book that I follow blindly (a.k.a. LDD3) suggests that most of the time security is a policy best handled at higher levels. Of course, there are many exceptions to this.

It also suggests general principles, such as never ever trusting the input that comes from users and other programs and always validating it, apply.
