# Chapter 2: Building and Running Modules

In this chapter we will write our first hello world module and learn some basic shared code. But we need to set up our development enviroment before.

## Setting Up Your Test System

Since we are deaing with kernel and if we break it, things may go south very fast, it is wise to **not** use your actual system to test your modules. But because it makes things easier, running the kernel you are targetting is also good practice.

My solution to that I will use virtual machines. But you can use containers, chroot enviroments or maybe even a spare laptop that is just a few years younger than you. Pick your poison. What really matter is you have kernel headers and a kernel source tree of the kernel you running. Obtaining kernel source tree may vary distro to distro slightly. So I will not go deep into how to set up which distro. In some distros it maybe necessary to have `linux-headers` package installed. Check out your distro specific documantation (RTFM people!). Here is my setup:

- Linux: 6.7.1 version of Arch Linux kernel. As far as I know It does not alter any critical stuff. So it should be fine.
- FreeBSD: 14.0 release with patch level 3

## Let's Write Our First Module

### Linux

Here is our hello world module for Linux:

```c
// hello.c example from the LDD3 book.
#include <linux/init.h>
#include <linux/module.h>
MODULE_LICENSE("Dual BSD/GPL");

static int hello_init(void) {
  printk(KERN_ALERT "Hello, world\n");
  return 0;
}

static void hello_exit(void) {
	printk(KERN_ALERT "Goodbye, cruel world\n");
}

module_init(hello_init);
module_exit(hello_exit);
```

We start by including necessary headers. When you include theese headers your lsp might yell at you about it not being able to find these modules in usual places like `/usr/include`. It is ok; we will specify where to include this headers in `Makefile`. We continue declaring the license of our module with `MODULE_LICENSE()` macro. If we don't do that our code will not compile.

Then we define two functions: `hello_init` will get called when the module loaded, `hello_exit` will get called when the module unloaded. Inside of this functions we call `printk` function.

> The module_init and module_exit lines use special kernel macros to indicate the role of these two functions.

> The printk function is defined in the Linux kernel and made available to modules; it behaves similarly to the standard C library function printf. The kernel needs its own printing function because it runs by itself, without the help of the C library. The module can call printk because, after insmod has loaded it, the module is linked to the kernel and can access the kernel’s public symbols (functions and variables, as detailed in the next section). The string KERN_ALERT is the priority of the message.
> The priority is just a string, such as <1>, which is prepended to the printk format string. Note the lack of a comma after KERN_ALERT; adding a comma there is a common and annoying typo (which, fortunately, is caught by the compiler).

The book explains compiling the module further in the chapter. Until then let's just __steal__ a Makefile from the repo [Examples of LDD3 by martinezjavier](https://github.com/martinezjavier/ldd3/blob/master/misc-modules/Makefile). Here it is:

```Makefile
ifeq ($(KERNELRELEASE),)
    KERNELDIR ?= /usr/lib/modules/$(shell uname -r)/build
    PWD := $(shell pwd)

modules:
	$(MAKE) -C $(KERNELDIR) M=$(PWD) modules

modules_install:
	$(MAKE) -C $(KERNELDIR) M=$(PWD) modules_install

clean:
	rm -rf *.o *~ core .depend .*.cmd *.ko *.mod.c .tmp_versions *.mod modules.order *.symvers

.PHONY: modules modules_install clean

else
    # called from kernel build system: just declare what our modules are
    obj-m := hello.o
endif
```

Let's compile our hello world module:
```sh
make
```
Output of the command looks like this:
```
make -C /usr/lib/modules/6.7.1-arch1-1/build M=/home/user/git-repos/dev-drivers/linux modules
make[1]: Entering directory '/usr/lib/modules/6.7.1-arch1-1/build'
  CC [M]  /home/user/git-repos/dev-drivers/linux/hello.o
  MODPOST /home/user/git-repos/dev-drivers/linux/Module.symvers
  CC [M]  /home/user/git-repos/dev-drivers/linux/hello.mod.o
  LD [M]  /home/user/git-repos/dev-drivers/linux/hello.ko
  BTF [M] /home/user/git-repos/dev-drivers/linux/hello.ko
make[1]: Leaving directory '/usr/lib/modules/6.7.1-arch1-1/build'
```
Then, as a **root** user, we load and unload our module and display the logs.
```sh
insmod ./hello.ko
rmmod ./hello.ko
dmesg
```
Output of the `dmesg`:
```
...
[ 6790.159821] hello: loading out-of-tree module taints kernel.
[ 6790.159826] hello: module verification failed: signature and/or required key missing - tainting kernel
[ 6790.160081] Hello, world
[ 6796.692759] Goodbye, cruel world
```

### FreeBSD

And here is the code for similarly functioning FreeBSD module:

```c
#include <sys/systm.h>
#include <sys/conf.h>
#include <sys/kernel.h>
#include <sys/module.h>
#include <sys/param.h>
#include <sys/types.h>

static int hello_load(module_t mod, int cmd, void *arg) {
  int err = 0;
  switch (cmd) {
  case MOD_LOAD:
    log(1, "Hello from FreeBSD module.");
    break;
  case MOD_UNLOAD:
    log(1, "Goodbye, Moonman!");
    break;
  default:
    err = EOPNOTSUPP;
    break;
  }
  return err;
}

static moduledata_t hello_mod = {"hello", hello_load, NULL};
DECLARE_MODULE(hello, hello_mod, SI_SUB_KLD, SI_ORDER_ANY);
```

Well, that is lot of headers. I belive (but not so sure) `sys/systm.h` header should be above some others. Otherwise code does not compile.

You may notice we did'nt defined two different functions for load and unload situations. We only defined one function. In the function signature, we accept a varaible called `cmd` and switch on that. Kernel will tell us if our module getting loaded or unloaded via this `cmd` argument.

We using `log(9)` this time instead of `printk` to wirte our message to logs.

Then we declare a struct contains the name of our module, event handler and a void pointer for extra data which we did'nt use. Then we use `DECLARE_MOUDLE(9)` macro to declare our module. First argument is the name of the moduel, second is data of the module that we defined, subsystem interface and the initialization order.

Makefile of our FreeBSD module is much simpler:

```Makefile
SRCS=hello.c		    # Source files of our module
KMOD=hello		    # Name of our module

.include <bsd.kmod.mk>	    # We include kernel module makefile
```

Compile it using `make`, load with `kldload ./hello.ko`, unload with `kldunload ./hello.ko`. And finally print the logs with `dmesg`:
```
...
Hello from FreeBSD module.
Goodbye, Moonman!
```

## Apps Versus Kernel Modules

Unlike most small or medium-sized apps that perform one task from beginning to end, kernel modules register themselves for future usage, and their init function terminates immediately. This is kind of like [event-driven programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Event-driven_programming).

An app may release resources lazily or may not even release them. However, the exit function of the kernel module must undo everything the init function allocated. Otherwise, some stuff may stick around until a reboot.

You can call any external function from your app as long as you linked against the library that defines the function. But, a kernel module only links against the kernel. Therefore, you can only call functions that are defined in the kernel and made available to you. `printk` and `log(9)` were examples of that.

When a segmentation fault occurs in an app, one might call it relatively harmless. When a seg-fault occurs in a kernel module, it might kill the current process only if you are lucky; if you are not, it can kill the whole system.

### User Space and Kernel Space

Here's some operating systems 101: The role of an OS is to provide and control access to hardware in a consistent manner and prevent unauthorized access. Unix prevents unauthorized access by separating kernel space and user space. But this requires hardware support.

Most modern CPU designs implement different operating levels in the CPU itself. Different levels have different roles and limitations. At the lowest level, the CPU directly controls hardware and memory access. A program can switch levels via a limited number of gates. In Unix, the kernel runs at the highest level (a.k.a. supervisor mode), and apps runs at the lowest level (a.k.a. user mode).

Kernel space and user space have not only different privileges but also their own memory mapping and address space.

> Unix transfers execution from user space to kernel space whenever an application issues a system call or is suspended by a hardware interrupt. Kernel code executing a system call is working in the context of a process it operates on behalf of the calling process and can access data in the process’s address space. Code that handles interrupts, on the other hand, is asynchronous with respect to processes and is not related to any particular process.

> The role of a module is to extend kernel functionality; modularized code runs in kernel space. Usually, a driver performs both the tasks outlined previously: some functions in the module are executed as part of system calls, and some are in charge of interrupt handling.

### Concurrency in the Kernel

Most apps run sequentially. Of course, there are exceptions to that. Kernel code (including our drivers) must be written with the idea that many things can happen at once in mind. More than one process might try to use your driver. Therefore, your driver should be written with concurrency in mind.

Since Linux can run on symmetric multiprocessor systems, your driver could be executing on more than one CPU. As a result, your code must be able to handle that.

### The Current Process

> Although kernel modules don’t execute sequentially as applications do, most actions performed by the kernel are done on behalf of a specific process. Kernel code can refer to the current process by accessing the global item `current`, defined in `<asm/current.h>`, which yields a pointer to `struct task_struct`, defined by `<linux/sched.h>`. The `current` pointer refers to the process that is currently executing. During the execution of a system call, such as open or read, the current process is the one that invoked the call. Kernel code can use process-specific information by using `current`, if it needs to do so.

> Actually, `current` is not truly a global variable. The need to support SMP systems forced the kernel developers to develop a mechanism that finds the current process on the relevant CPU. This mechanism must also be fast since references to `current` happen frequently. The result is an architecture-dependent mechanism that, usually, hides a pointer to the `task_struct` structure on the kernel stack. The details of the implementation remain hidden from other kernel subsystems though, and a device driver can just include `<linux/sched.h>` and refer to the current process.

### Some Other Details to Keep in Mind

The kernel has a very small stack, and it is shared across the entire kernel-space call chain. Therefore, if you need large structures, allocating them dynamically is a better idea.

In the Linux kernel API, there are functions that start with a double underscore `(__)`. This practically means: "Bro, hope you know what you're doing by calling this function."

Kernel code can't perform floating-point arithmetic.
